federalist number eight
the consequences of hostilities between
the states from the new york packet
tuesday november 20th 1787
hamilton to the people of the state of
new york
assuming it therefore as an established
truth that the several states in case of
disunion
or such combinations of them as might
happen to be formed out of the wreck of
the general confederacy would be subject
to those vicissitudes of peace and war
of friendship and enmity with each
other which have fallen to the lot of
all neighboring nations not united under
one government
let us enter into a concise detail of
some of the consequences that would
attend such a situation
war between the states in the first
period of their separate existence
would be accompanied by much greater
distresses than it commonly is in those
countries where regular military
establishments have long obtained
the disciplined armies always kept on
foot on the continent of europe
though they bear a malignant aspect to
liberty and economy have notwithstanding
been productive of the signal advantage
of rendering sudden conquests
impracticable
and of preventing that rapid desolation
which used to mark the progress of war
prior to their introduction
the art of fortification has contributed
to the same ends
the nations of europe are encircled with
chains of fortified places which
mutually obstruct invasion
campaigns are wasted in reducing two or
three frontier garrisons to gain
admittance into an enemy's country
similar impediments occur at every step
to exhaust the strength and delay the
progress of an invader
formerly an invading army would
penetrate into the heart of a
neighboring country almost as soon as
intelligence of its approach could be
received
but now a comparatively small force of
disciplined troops acting on the
defensive with the aid of posts
is able to impede and finally to
frustrate the enterprises of one much
more considerable
the history of war in that quarter of
the globe is no longer a history of
nations subdued and empires overturned
but of towns taken and retaken
of battles that decide nothing of
retreats more beneficial than victories
of much effort and little acquisition in
this country the scene would be
altogether reversed
the jealousy of military establishments
would postpone them as long as possible
the want of fortifications leaving the
frontiers of one state open to another
would facilitate inroads
the populous states would with little
difficulty overrun their less populous
neighbors
conquest would be as easy to be made as
difficult to be retained
war therefore would be dissultary and
predatory plunder and devastation ever
march in the train of irregulars
the calamities of individuals would make
the principle figure in the events which
would characterize our military exploits
this picture is not too highly wrought
though i confess it would not long
remain a just one
safety from external danger is the most
powerful director of national conduct
even the ardent love of liberty will
after a time give way to its dictates
the violent destruction of life and
property incident to war
the continual effort and alarm attendant
on a state of continual danger
will compel nations the most attached to
liberty to resort for repose and
security to institutions which have a
tendency to destroy their civil and
political rights
to be more safe they at length become
willing to run the risk of being less
free
the institutions chiefly alluded to are
standing armies
and the correspondent appendages of
military establishments
standing armies it is said are not
provided against in the new constitution
and it is therefore inferred that they
may exist under it
this objection will be fully examined in
its proper place and it will be shown
that the only natural precaution which
could have been taken on this subject
has been taken
and a much better one than is to be
found in any constitution that has been
heretofore framed in america
most of which contain no guard at all on
this subject
their existence however from the very
terms of the proposition
is at most problematical and uncertain
but standing armies it may be replied
must inevitably result from a
dissolution of the confederacy
frequent war and constant apprehension
which require a state of his constant
preparation will infallibly produce them
the weaker states or confederacies would
first have recourse to them
to put themselves upon inequality with
their more potent neighbors
they would endeavor to supply the
inferiority of population and resources
by a more regular and effective system
of defense by disciplined troops
and by fortifications they would at the
same time be necessitated to strengthen
the executive arm of government
in doing which their constitutions would
acquire a progressive direction toward
monarchy it is of the nature of war to
increase the executive at the expense of
the legislative authority
the expedients which have been mentioned
would soon give the states or
confederacies that made use of them
a superiority over their neighbors small
states or states of less natural
strength under vigorous governments and
with the assistance of disciplined
armies
have often triumphed over large states
or states of greater natural strength
which have been destitute of these
advantages neither the pride nor the
safety of the more important states or
confederacies would permit them long to
submit to this mortifying and
adventitious superiority
they would quickly resort to means
similar to those by which it had been
affected to reinstate themselves in
their lost preeminence
thus we should in a little time see
established in every part of this
country
the same engines of despotism which have
been the scourge of the old world
this at least would be the natural
course of things and our reasonings will
be the more likely to be just in
proportion as they are accommodated to
this standard
these are not vague inferences drawn
from supposed or speculative defects in
a constitution
the whole power of which is lodged in
the hands of a people or their
representatives and delegates
but they are solid conclusions drawn
from the natural and necessary progress
of human affairs
it may perhaps be asked by way of
objection to this why did not standing
armies spring up out of the contentions
which so often distracted the ancient
republics of greece
different answers equally satisfactory
may be given to this question
the industrious habits of the people of
the present day absorbed in the pursuits
of gain and devoted to the improvements
of agriculture and commerce are
incompatible with the condition of a
nation of soldiers which was the
true condition of the people of those
republics the means of revenue which
have been so greatly multiplied by the
increase of gold and silver
and of the arts of industry and the
science of finance which is the
offspring of modern times concurring
with the habits of nations have produced
an
entire revolution in the system of war
and have rendered disciplined armies
distinct from the body of the citizens
the inseparable companions of frequent
hostility
there is a wide difference also between
military establishments in a country
seldom exposed by its situation to
internal invasions
and one which is often subject to them
and always apprehensive of them
the rulers of the former can have a good
pretext if they are even so inclined to
keep on foot armies so numerous as must
of necessity
be maintained in the latter these armies
being in the first case rarely if at all
called into activity for interior
defense the people are in no danger of
being broken to military subordination
the laws are not accustomed to
relaxations in favor of military
exigencies
the civil state remains in full vigor
neither corrupted nor confounded with
the principles or propensities of the
other state
the smallness of the army renders the
natural strength of the community an
over match for it and the citizens not
habituated to look up to the military
power for protection
or to submit to its oppressions neither
love nor fear the soldiery
they view them with a spirit of jealous
acquiescence in a necessary evil
and stand ready to resist the power
which they suppose may be exerted to the
prejudice of their rights
the army under such circumstances may
usefully aid the magistrate to suppress
a small faction or an occasional mob or
insurrection but it will be unable to
enforce encroachments against the united
efforts of the great body
of the people in a country in the
predicament last described
the contrary of all this happens the
perpetual menacings of danger oblige the
government to be always prepared to
repel it
its enemies must be numerous enough for
instant defense
the continual necessity for their
services enhances the importance of the
soldier
and proportionably degrades the
condition of the citizen
the military state becomes elevated
above the civil the inhabitants of
territories often the theater of war
are unavoidably subjected to frequent
infringements on their rights
which serve to weaken their sense of
those rights and by degrees the people
are brought to consider the soldiery not
only as their protectors but as their
superiors
the transition from this disposition to
that of considering them
masters is neither remote nor difficult
but it is very difficult to prevail upon
a people under such impressions to make
a bold or effectual resistance to
usurpations supported by the military
power
the kingdom of great britain falls
within the first description
an insular situation and a powerful
marine guarding it in a great measure
against the possibility of foreign
invasion
supersede the necessity of a numerous
army within the kingdom
a sufficient force to make head against
a sudden descent till the militia could
have time to rally and embody
is all that has been deemed requisite no
motive of national policy has demanded
nor would public opinion have tolerated
a larger number of troops upon its
domestic establishment
there has been for a long time past
little room for the operation of the
other causes which have been enumerated
as the consequences of internal war
this peculiar felicity of situation has
in a great degree contributed to
preserve the liberty which that country
to this day enjoys
in spite of the prevalent vanality and
corruption
if on the contrary britain had been
situated on the continent
and had been compelled as she would have
been by that situation to make her
military establishments at home
co-extensive with those of the other
great powers of europe
she like them would in all probability
be at this day a victim to the absolute
power of a single man
tis possible though not easy that the
people of that island may be enslaved
from other causes but it cannot be by
the prowess of an army so inconsiderable
as that which has been usually kept up
within the kingdom
if we are wise enough to preserve the
union we may for ages enjoy an advantage
similar to that of an insulated
situation
europe is at a great distance from us
her colonies and our vicinity will be
likely to continue too much
disproportioned in strength to be able
to give us any dangerous annoyance
extensive military establishments cannot
in this position be necessary to our
security
but if we should be disunited and the
integral parts should either remain
separated
or which is most probable should be
thrown together into two or three
confederacies we should be in a short
course of time
in a predicament of the continental
powers of europe our liberties would be
a prey to the means of defending
ourselves against the ambition and
jealousy of each other
this is an idea not superficial or
futile but solid and weighty
it deserves the most serious and mature
consideration of every prudent and
honest man
of whatever party if such men will make
a firm and solemn pause
and meditate dispassionately on the
importance of this interesting idea
if they will contemplate it in all its
attitudes and trace it to all its
consequences
they will not hesitate to part with
trivial objections to her constitution
the rejection of which would in all
probability put a final period to the
union
the airy phantoms that flit before the
distempered imaginations of some of its
adversaries
would quickly give pace to the more
substantial forms of dangers
real certain and formidable
publius